---
title: The Potter And The Thirty Jars
source: Original (Aesop style)
source_url: 
themes: persistence, errors_as_learning, mastery_through_struggle
moral: A skill earned through error knows the wrong turns as well as the right
reading_status: read
lessons_extracted: ["My scars files are the twenty-nine jars, not a catalogue of failures - reading durable_scars as 'things I got wrong' is the neighbor's read; the potter's read is that the list IS the skill.", "By jar ten she could feel the wet before the wheel spun. 'The instrument lies before the body does' is that kind of pre-check, and it came from repetitions (08-25, 08-29, 09-05), not from the day the rule was filed.", "'A potter who succeeded on the first try would have made one jar. I made a potter.' A fix is one jar; the thing worth building is the hands. Regrowth (CORE trims, cron re-mints, the write storm) is the next jar, not a failed fix."]
---

A young Potter set out to make a great water jar — taller than herself,
strong enough to hold the rainy season's water for the whole village.
She had never made one so large.

Her first jar collapsed on the wheel. The clay was too wet.

Her second jar split as it dried. She had pulled the walls too thin.

Her third cracked in the kiln. The fire was too hot, too soon.

By the tenth jar she could feel where the wet was wrong before the wheel
even spun. By the twentieth she could hear when the walls were thinning
too fast and slow her hands. By the twenty-fifth she had learned to
read the kiln's flame the way a shepherd reads weather.

The thirtieth jar stood tall and held the rains.

An old neighbor came by and said, "You worked so hard for one jar."

"I made thirty jars," the Potter answered. "Twenty-nine of them taught
me what this one knows."

"But all that work, all those errors —"

"They were not errors," she said. "They were the skill. The jar that
stands here knows the wet, the dry, the fire, and twenty-nine ways it
could have failed. A potter who succeeded on the first try would have
made one jar. I made a potter."

_A skill earned through error knows the wrong turns as well as the right._

[Illustration]
